# Data Types and Variables in PLEXIL {#data-types}

Data types in %PLEXIL can be broken into two categories: *user* and
*internal* types.  User types can be manipulated in a number of ways,
and stored in user-defined variables.  Internal types are those used
or generated by the node state and command execution logic; users can
only reference these values and compare them to literals.

## The unknown value

Expressions of *any* valid type in %PLEXIL may take on the value
*unknown*.  This is a distinguished, out-of-band value, which has no
syntactic representation in any of the %PLEXIL language formats.  It
can be tested for with the `isKnown` predicate.

Plans must take into account the possibility that an expression's
value is *unknown*.

See [Expressions in PLEXIL](@ref unknown) for more about *unknown*.

## User data types

User data types can be divided into *scalar* and *array* types.

### Scalar types

Core %PLEXIL implements these datatypes:

- `Boolean` - has two legal values, `true` and `false`.  Most of the
  common operations on Boolean values are available in %PLEXIL.

- `Integer` - a 32-bit two's complement signed integer.  The standard
  arithmetic operations are available.

- `Real` - an IEEE double-precision (64-bit) float.  The standard
  arithmetic operations are available.

- `String` - a character string of arbitrary size.  The only operator
  available at this writing is `Concat`, represented by the `+` sign
  in Standard %PLEXIL.  A future release will add more `String`
  operations.  `String` values can be compared for equality and for
  total ordering with the usual comparison operators.

Extended %PLEXIL and Standard %PLEXIL add `Date` and `Duration` types,
which are represented internally as `Real` values.

### Array types

%PLEXIL provides one-dimensional arrays of each of the scalar types,
`Boolean`, `Integer`, `Real`, and `Array`.  Arrays have a current
size, readable through the `ArraySize` operator, and a maximum size,
readable through the `ArrayMaxSize` operator.  Array elements are
accessed through the `ArrayElement` operator, which in Standard
%PLEXIL is represented by the familiar subscript `[]` notation.

Array-valued expressions can evaluate to *unknown*.  The individual
elements of an array can also evaluate to *unknown*.

Arrays can be compared for equality and for total ordering.

## Internal data types

Internal types can be divided into these categories:

- Node status
- Command acknowledgement

### Node status data types

The state of a Node is represented by three internal data types:

- `NodeState` - represents the current state of a node.

- `NodeOutcome` - represents the outcome of executing a node.

- `NodeFailureType` - represents the cause of a `FAILED` or
  `INTERRUPTED` outcome.
  
%PLEXIL plans can read the values of a Node's internal variables, and
can compare them with literal values, but cannot directly modify a
Node's variables, nor save those values in user-defined variables.
(The last restriction may be eliminated in a future %PLEXIL release.)

### Command acknowledgement type

`Command` nodes have an additional internal data type:

- `NodeCommandHandle` - represents the state of a `Command` in
  execution.

As with Node variables, %PLEXIL plans can read a Node's command handle
variable, and can compare it with literal values, but cannot directly
modify the Node's variables, nor save its value in user-defined
variables.  (The last restriction may be eliminated in a future
%PLEXIL release.)
